[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystal healing is an ancient
technology that has been passed
down for many generations
across a variety of different
cultures.
One of the biggest questions we
all have is, how does it work?
How is it that a stone, this
seemingly inanimate object,
can help us heal.
In this episode, we're going
to explore how crystals heal
the mind, body, and spirit.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We consider crystal healing
as a viable therapy for healing
the human body.
All the principles
of crystal classes,
crystal systems, and
even the formation
of crystals themselves,
natural Earthborn crystals,
come into this answer.
And it begins to become
very clear how a crystal can
support our healing.
>> Crystals are this perfect
embodiment of sacred geometry.
And therefore, any time we're
working with sacred geometry,
it's putting out
frequencies that
are according to balance
and proportion and harmony
and beauty.
And so they are naturally going
to emit this energy of harmony.
And when we then absorb
that energy of harmony,
it helps us to
entrain or to come
into a sympathetic
resonance with that harmony.
It's very stable
vibrational energy.
And it just keeps putting
out its frequencies.
Whereas us, we have a
broad range of frequencies
that we can vibrate at.
And we're constantly in flux.
Humans are constantly changing.
And so when our energy comes
into connection with a crystal,
the crystal's
actually going to be
the more stable form of energy.
And it would actually
take a lot of energy
to try and shift the
crystal structure.
And our energy is not going
to be able to do that.
So therefore, the
crystal structure
is so stable and so
strong in its frequency
that it just keeps putting out
continuously that that then
is absorbed by us.
And we then will start
to entrain and come
into phase with that
crystal's vibration
according to where it
is placed on the body.
>> When we are
healing with crystals,
we are essentially
working with energy.
What a crystal does is transform
and transmute every single kind
of energy that permeates it.
Thus, the crystal
practitioner is
looking at focusing precise
and specific forms of energy
through the crystal.
To either amplify or
transform these energies,
to help and to heal,
to be able to work
with the energy of
crystals and understand
how they can be
used, we need thus
to understand how energy works.
>> Crystal healing is a healing
modality that works directly
with the light, color, beauty,
and perfect geometric forms.
The mineral kingdom
assists us in balancing
all aspects of our being.
The presence of
crystals on the body
positively influences the
human electromagnetic field,
activates the chakras or energy
centers, the nervous system,
and stimulates the
corresponding endocrine glands.
The body naturally attunes
to the crystalline vibration
and frequency, which
in turn amplifies
the senses and the
opening of portals
to access multi-dimensional
fields of knowing and being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> First of all,
crystals are transducers.
Now a transducer is something
that takes one form of energy
and converts it into
another form of energy.
It's an amazing technology.
If you think about
that principle
and you apply it to the way
that the quartz crystal can
take light, visible
light, from our sun
and convert that
into forms of energy,
that can be absorbed
bioelectrically
and that can be
absorbed into the organs
and the tissues of our bodies
without any other technology
around.
>> Specific energies work
through different frequencies.
One way of understanding
this is through the study
of sound and music
and its frequencies.
Another way that is
closer to crystal work
is through the teachings
on the color spectrum.
The color that a crystal
manifests is one of the aspects
that it orients its energy.
A red crystal does not work the
same way as a violet crystal.
Also, we have an understanding
that everything in the world
is governed by the elements,
which are the basic building
blocks of the world.
We are talking here of the
fundamental five elements
theory that exists
in many traditions
and also in the Native
American tradition.
In our elements theory, we
have wind, water, fire, earth,
and the sacred sound.
So understanding the
frequencies of sound, color,
and the elements, we are
thus able to understand
how energy work and
use this understanding
to channel the right kind of
energy through the crystal
to help and to heal.
This takes years of training and
practice and cannot be conveyed
in a few words.
A good example of this training
is the traditional Cherokee
training.
When a young person,
a child, displays
what we call the gift--
that is the right disposition
to become a crystal healer--
they will undergo 11
to 12 years of training
and spiritual practice before
they even touch a crystal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The art of laying on of
stones or crystal healing is
one of the most effective
methods of cleansing the aura,
releasing suppressed
emotions, traumas,
and connecting a person
with their own inner truth
and power.
Crystals and stones assist us
in a self-empowering process
by increasing the
amount of light present
in the aura, which
stimulates and activates
the more powerful but
subtle realms of being.
Crystals will also
mirror the subconscious,
highlight an emotion that
is ready to be purified,
or reveal a mental
construct that is outdated.
Together with proper
therapeutic techniques applied,
there is a
possibility of healing
on all physical, emotional,
mental, and spiritual planes,
which makes crystal healing
an advanced healing art.
>> Since the Chinese have been
working with stones for so long
and recording their
information for so long,
much of the early
information is empirical.
That is, they
learned what worked
and what didn't work
through their experience
and observations.
Their explanations
for why things work
is thoroughly grounded in
their very cohesive philosophy
of life and their very
subtle understanding
of how energy functions.
In China's first Materia
medica written down
around the year
220, understanding
of the use of stones and herbs
was sufficiently sophisticated
that they were categorized as
upper grade, substances used
to support and nourish
life, middle grade,
substances to help maintain
a life without disease,
and lower grade for use when
there is actual illness.
Some of the stones included
in the upper grade category
are jade, azurite, fluorite,
quartz crystals, and mica.
Middle grade stones included
stalactite, magnetite, gypsum,
sulfur, and feldspar.
And lower grade stones
included malachite, hematite,
and according to some, agate.
>> We are 70% water.
The water is based on a
tetrahedral structure, two
hydrogens and one oxygen.
So at the very foundation,
where they're talking about
the DNA or the foundation
of our cells,
liquid in our cells,
we are crystalline in nature.
Our blood is crystal.
And our bone is crystal.
And the energy
centers that make up
the chakra centers, the
energy centers of the body,
are based upon
crystalline structures.
When we begin to take all of
these ideas into consideration,
it becomes clear how you
could take a specific crystal
of a specific symmetry
and the specific geometry,
and how that crystal may relate
to a crystalline substance
in the human body that
have a similar symmetry
and a similar geometry.
From my perspective, I think
the significance of crystals
in healing is that
we may use a crystal
as a point of reference,
a reference for what
the cells in our bodies may be
vibrating at, at an optimal,
in an optimal condition and
through our trauma in life,
through the stress of life--
and who doesn't have
stress in the world today?
Ultraviolet radiation,
electromagnetic radiation
through environmental toxins,
through toxic thoughts,
feelings, emotions, beliefs,
through human trauma
that we all have, it
begins to make sense
how we could use another
crystalline structure that
has not undergone
that trauma and place
it close to the body as
a point of reference.
And our body, through
what is called resonance,
our body will sink
into resonance
with that external structure.
So we become more
aligned once again.
And when we do that, we
call that good health.
>> First, I want to say that
relative to other healing
substances, stone
medicine is slow.
In their density, stones
themselves vibrate very slowly.
Their slow rate of
vibration causes
stones to resonate, especially
with very deep aspects
of our bodies and minds.
It takes time for us
to feel their effects,
because we have to be able
to go as deeply as they
are capable of going.
If we accept that we
are energetic bodies
and that everything
in existence has
its own energetic
signature, it's
not hard to understand that
we are affected energetically
by pretty much
everything we encounter.
Whenever something
that is not me
comes into my
sphere of awareness,
many subtle messages
occur within my body.
Is this not me
helpful or harmful?
Do I want to absorb
it and make it me,
or mobilize my immune
system to fight it off?
It's not me, and I want
to keep it that way.
When we're using stones
to touch the skin,
the body responds to
the energetic messages
coming from the chemical
composition, the weight
and density of the stone.
But what if you're
wearing a pendant
on top of your clothing?
Even still, the
cells in your body
are constantly emitting photons.
Your body's light interacts
with the structure of the stone,
joining with the light
coming from outside the body,
hitting the stone, bouncing
around inside the stone's
geometric structure.
When the newly shaped energy
interacts with our own body's
energy, we are affected by it.
When we ingest stone
water or elixirs,
we're absorbing these qualities
at a deeper level of anatomy.
We're digesting them.
>> Crystals aren't just useful
when it comes to physical
healing, they are also known
to be allies when it comes
to transforming
psycho-spiritual dynamics.
Not so much in terms of actually
changing someone's behavior,
but more in terms of
behavioral illumination,
becoming aware of one's actions.
Behavioral illumination
allows someone
to confront the source
of their patterns.
This loosens karmic
bonds and helps
people to break through
unconscious patterns.
>> When we place
crystals on our bodies,
our parasympathetic nervous
system gets activated.
We relax.
And as we enter into
our inner landscape,
we create more
space within to be
able to witness the shadows
that are blocking us
and are waiting to be
released and dispersed.
Often, all we need to do
is notice their presence,
feel the pain, the shame,
the regrets, the fear.
And as we generously
give ourselves the space
to let these shadows arise,
I as a facilitator of healing
empower, the receiver, you,
to release and let it go.
This letting go happens once
we realize it is there--
discovering the
root cause of it,
allowing vulnerability
and self-compassion
and sacred presence
to witness, and then
choosing to release
it once and for all.
>> Vedic Gemology really
is a form of therapy.
Gems can be used to help us
master these lessons that we
are here to learn
on this planet.
If we get stuck and
out of alignment
with our true calling, gems
can help us get unstuck.
But we must consciously
participate in
and work with the effects
of these gemstones.
If we're out of alignment
with our life purpose
and we're putting on a gem
to try to target that life
purpose, if we're
in our own way,
gems will make that
painstakingly clear
until we make these
changes that we really
need to make for ourselves.
I'm careful to only
work with people
who show that they're
ready to grow and evolve
and to be accountable
and to self-reflect.
Astrological gemstones need
to be properly prescribed.
We need to look at the
wearer's astrological chart
to determine which
gemstones are going
to be best for them to wear.
Not all of our planets are
necessarily good or supportive
for us.
So not all planetary
gemstones are
going to work for everybody.
>> When we start
working with stones,
the Chinese speak of
entering the stone gate.
And they specify
three methods of use--
topical, internal,
and intentional.
Topical application
includes placing stones
on points or areas of the
body or wearing jewelry
to touch the skin.
The internal method includes
drinking elixirs or waters
infused with the properties
of an individual stone
or a combination of several
stones for a balanced formula.
The intentional method
includes wearing jewelry
for a particular purpose,
in particular to support
or transform our
constitutional natures.
The method also
includes placing stones
in certain parts
of our environment
to support a healthy
harmonious movement of energy
and to remind us of
qualities that we want
to prioritize in our lives.
>> Crystals teach us that
instead of burying or avoiding
what does not feel good, to
actually engage the pain,
to feel the drama and breathe
through it breath by breath.
That way, we alchemize the
emotions, keep it moving.
So it doesn't get lodged in the
body to manifest into a denser
form like a tumor.
It's important to
move that energy,
pick ourselves up, and resume
our step towards the light.
>>We've also noticed
that gems begin
working for people almost
as soon as they're purchased
before they're even worn.
It seems that the
intention to wear the stone
or to commit to it will begin
to change the course of karma
almost right away.
We had a lady recently get a
Venus gemstone for herself.
She was a medical
professional suffering
from burnout and exhaustion.
And she wanted a little bit
more support in her life.
This was a really
big purchase for her.
She was nervous about
making the investment.
But she felt more confident
when we matched her
to the right gem.
We were setting it
into jewelry for her.
She hadn't received
the stone yet,
when a couple of days later,
she got called into a meeting
with her supervisors.
She was scared that this was
going to be a critical meeting.
But as it turns out,
they wanted to let
her know how incredible
and wonderful
and supported she was.
And out of the blue, they
wrote her a bonus check
that she was not anticipating
for almost the exact cost
of the gemstone that
she had purchased.
>> Of course, the first crystal
with which we work is cleaning,
polishing, and
purifying ourselves.
Before any healing work
with crystals can commence,
there must be
spiritual preparation.
There are two
other preliminaries
to convey in the art of
healing with crystals.
The second preliminary
is you need
to cultivate respect for
crystals as living sentient
beings.
So crystals are
multi-dimensional beings.
And a crystal practitioner
who understands
the living nature of crystals
does not use the crystal.
They work with the crystal.
So that's the
second preliminary--
having respect for the crystal.
The third preliminary is
respect for Mother Earth.
Crystals are very intimate
part of Mother Earth.
They channel her
energy meridians.
And huge deposits of crystalline
substance in the Earth body
are her energy centers,
what you would call chakras.
With these crystals,
she communicates
with the other planets and the
sun and other celestial beings,
because they're
also living beings.
A crystal healing
practitioner needs
to be aware of our place
in the Earth's biosystem
and our responsibility
to the Earth.
>> The law of signature is
another model that is important
in Chinese medicine to help
understand the qualities of all
the various substances
used for healing.
With regard to the healing
dynamics of stones,
it is particularly important
to know how a stone was formed
and at what level of the Earth.
The level of the
Earth translates
to the level of our
bodies where the stone
has the most affinity.
Softness and hardness
are also important.
A hard stone can strengthen
us for life's challenges,
that could be aquamarine.
A soft stone, maybe calcite,
can make us more resilient.
Many red stones
affect the blood.
They're often red because of
iron content, which resonates
with the iron in our blood.
>> Astrological gemstones
possess and transmit a potent
form of energy that can affect
the wearer and their entire
reality.
They connect us to a
divine form of intelligence
that governs the entire
world and probably
the entire universe.
The light and color frequencies
within certain gemstones
vibrate at a very specific
harmonic resonance.
This resonance, when it's
compatible with the wearer,
can enhance and purify the
entire human energy system.
Our most supportive planets
from an astrological perspective
influence the most
positive part of our lives.
And that is what
we want to channel
with astrological gemstones.
>> Crystal healing therapy works
because the crystals are going
to respond to our body.
They're also going to
respond to our biofield.
And then they will put their
own energy response back out.
And so it's a
two-way communication
that happens between
us and the crystal
through vibrational energy.
>> We're living a rare
convergence of natural rhythms
and cycles in human history,
unlike anything we've seen
in 5,000 years of
recorded human history.
Crystals are a tool
for us to become
the best version of ourselves.
They are tools for us to
attune our physical biology.
So crystals can be
tremendous allies for us
in our lives at this pivotal
moment in human history
when we're all being
challenged to become
the best version of
ourselves and create
the best world possible.
>> Crystal healing has
been around for centuries.
Shamans, alchemists, and those
who could hear and receive
the language of
nature were called
by the mineral kingdom
itself to be instructed
into its use and properties.
Longstanding traditions have
experimented, passed on,
reported, and proven their
abilities over many generations
and continue to
utilize their healing
powers through their holistic
medical systems to this day.
As crystals abundantly
return into the hands of us,
the people, may
we tune into them
and superpower them with
our will and our intention
to heal ourselves, each
other, and our world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]